# Ubatuba - 2025

> Text written by Felipe, September 2024.

## The contradictions of a standing forest

Ubatuba is a municipality in the State of Sao Paulo, in Brazil. It lies exactly where the Tropic of Capricorn intersects with the countrie's long eastern coastline. More than 85% of its territory sits in environmental conservation areas, making it the municipality with the highest proportion of preserved Atlantic Forest ('Mata Atlantica') in that state. Just for sake of comparison, there is nationwide only an estimated 7% left of the area of original Mata Atlantica. This biome that used to cover most of Brazil's eastern region was almost completely destroyed through centuries of colonial exploitation and unsustainable development. The forest of old times was replaced through successive economic waves - from the selective extraction of the valuable red wood that named the country (Pau-brasil) to large plantations cultivated by enslaved and precarious labour (sugar cane, coffee, soy beans), as well as mining and massive scales of agricutlrueal and meat production. The country's fast urbanisation through the second half of the 20th century happened mostly in areas that used to be covered by Mata Atlantica. In mega cities like Sao Paulo, that heritage is hardly noticeable. And yet, what little is left of the original atlantic rainforest still hosts more plant and animal species than the whole European continent.

As a small-scale portrait of the current times, Ubatuba faces stark contradictions. Its remarkable status as a champion of natural preservation is not without its caveats. It obviously ensures benefits for the local population such as the access to clean water, constantly replaced by the coastal rains. The proximity with nature and a relatively unpolluted air are clearly beneficial for all, of course. On the other hand, there are pressing challenges regarding the region's socio-economic development. The standing forest is positive for the world, but requires the municipality to create alternative paths that comply with environmental regulation. It is not a coincidence that localities with less restrictions regarding land use and economic activity can pursue faster economic growth. After all, the contemporary economic model rewards detrimental practices such as deforestation, polluting industrial production, unsustainable mining and mindless construction. To a considerable part of Ubatuba's dominant classes - particularly those eager for short-term profits -, the environmental regulations amount to mere economic restrictions. Furthermore, many preservation areas were implemented during the period that the country was run by a dictatorship, before 1988. In the case of Ubatuba and the region, part of those areas were created to compensate for the construction of a coastal highway, and the whole process was perceived as authoritarian by local communities. Entire regions whose population used to live from the earth were forced to stop cultivating common land, hunting, fishing, and even gathering vegetables from the forest. It's important to remark that those communities traditionally made sustainable and regenerative use of the land, a fact unacknowledged for years by state authorities.

In order to ensure that its natural setting stays preserved, Ubatuba needs to find better ways forward. Its natural wealth - dozens of scenic beaches, forest hiking trails and waterfalls - make it very attractive for tourists. Informal accounts estimate that during the summer months, the population grows tenfold. That has huge impacts on the local economy and society. A 2013 study by Instituto Polis found that the largest industry in the region is not tourism, but construction. That can be in part attributed to the fact that the region has been through accelerated development in recent years. But according to local authorities, the type of construction indicates that most of it comprises low-grade vacation units. 

An important distinction needs to be made here between tourism and vacation homes. While the former is characterised by the temporary displacement of people to consume and hence transfer wealth and pay consumption taxes locally, the latter often means people spending time on their own secondary homes. Home owners vacationing will typically bring their own groceries, and spend less in restaurants, entertainment and other tourist attractions. That's not a good prospect for a local economy struggling to find routes for sustainable development. Those new buildings add pressure to local infrastructure - streets and roads, lighting, water and sewage - to be used mainly during the summer months and long weekends. Besides, it's a commonly acknowledged fact in localities such as Ubatuba that economic crises impact secondary homes disproportionately. Families that need to cut their spending will go less frequently to a beach house, and often will stop paying home property tax on their secondary home before reducing other costs on their main dwelling.

To summarise it, Ubatuba faces challenges that are typical for touristic destinations, added of even more complexity due to the restrictions imposed legally to protected areas. While the results of that scenario are unquestionably good for the planet, they impact the local population differently. Left with little choice, local working classes struggle to find meaning in their lives amid the wonders of easy consumerism, the embodied everyday oppression of precarious work, and what some of them perceive as unfair restrictions imposed by environmental legislation.

## Socio-biodiversity

Ubatuba is a culturally rich social setting. Time brought new characteristics to the local caiçara population, initially a mix of the silenced remnants of original Tupinambá with European colonial invaders – mainly Portuguese but from other nations as well. The forced displacement of enslaved African people is also part of the demographic mosaic. As well as in many parts of Brazil, further waves of economic migration brought people from other regions and countries to work: on the harbour, on coffee production, on the fishing industry, on construction and tourism. 

In the present day, the municipality has five recognised quilombo communities, composed of the descendants of the enslaved people of colonial times. Ubatuba's territory territory also features two indigenous areas within which four small villages are home to a few hundred Guarani Mbya . Quilombos, first peoples, and caiçara communities have their particular modes of living, their cultures, and political organisation. They exchange constantly with similar communities in the wider region, with assemblages such as Fórum das Comunidades Tradicionais (Forum of Traditional Communities) playing an important role in promoting cooperation between communities and external partners.

In recent decades, the region has also attracted creative workers and digital nomads seeking a life closer to nature. That trend grew gradually during the early 2000s, as the investment in local infrastructure was initially slow. The process was accelerated through the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing greater adoption of remote work. This was also a double-edged sword for some groups. For traditional communities it meant the relative growth in size of a type of inhabitant interested in authenticity, originality and diversity. Such trendy consumers express respect for the traditional ways and will often buy local craft, buy their produce and visit their restaurants. As for the urban working class, the arrival of such new population represents a growing demand for low-skill labour - typically in construction, maintenance and gardening, as well as in domestic services such as cleaning and childcare. On the other hand, there are systemic downsides such as gentrification, price inflation on groceries and basic services, as well as considerable pressure over the stock of real estate, pushing the poorest further to the outskirts, frequently at the border with protected areas.

Being a relatively small economy in comparison with similarly sized municipalities, Ubatuba suffers of another particular distortion. There is high academic interest in the city due to its natural wealth and social configuration. An estimated 2000 researchers visit Ubatuba every year to conduct research, fieldwork, or attend creative retreats. The locality has many times more mentions in scientific publications than any of the (larger and wealthier) cities surrounding it. And yet, there is no university in Ubatuba. That has direct consequences such as the fact that the science produced about the region is never shared locally. There is no academic library where school teachers could have access to papers and dissertations about the local ecosystems and communities. Further, the most talented, creative, and dedicated youngsters need to leave town to acquire a higher degree education. The nearest public University is a 2 hour drive from the city centre, in days with no traffic (which in the warmest 5 months typically means from Tuesday to Thursday). The nearest top-level University is at least a 5 hour drive on similar conditions. 

To make matters worse, even the rare youngster who makes it to a good University and would like to return to Ubatuba later on life will usually struggle to do so, as the local economy doesn't have much room to a great diversity of educated professions. Granted, the growing presence of remote work in the economy means that those professionals (researchers, artists, activists, tech entrepreneurs, marketing professionals and designers) can indeed move back to the city, be it in creative sectors or other knowledge-based fields. This is an ongoing process whose results will be felt over the coming years. 

## Connecting the dots

The absence of places to host exchange between traditional communities, urban cultures and the creative and knowledge-based sectors is not a newly perceived condition. A series of activities through the last couple of decades were initiated in Ubatuba that attempted to fill those gaps. One significant moment in that history was the first edition of the Tropixel Festival, in 2013. Tropixel has a loose relationship of exchange with the Finnish-born Pixelache festival and its network of arts-and-science festivals in different parts of the world: piksel in Norway, Afropixel in Senegal, Mal-au-pixel in France. The name Tropixel makes reference to the Tropic of Capricorn crossing the city.

Organised by a local team in partnership with the University of Juiz de Fora and many networks and collectives orbiting topics such as digital culture, open source software and participatory policy-making, Tropixel promoted contemporary discussions about science, culture, arts and society. That first edition brought theorists, engaged artists, activists and social entrepreneurs from diverse countries and many regions of Brazil. The event was intentionally organised to connect with the local context instead of only providing a scenic background for unrooted conversations. It featured seminars on local sustainable development and workshops on environmental technologies at the local technical schools; the temporary cultural occupation of public spaces and a then-abandoned bulding; multimedia performances and a movie session in a Quilombo. The festival had a long-lasting impact over the imaginary of local groups, actualising the image of Ubatuba as a where-and-when, instead of a vacation destination locked outside of time.

Over the following years, there were another four editions of Tropixel, though unfortunately inconstant due to deep political crises faced by the country following a parliamentary coup, the growth of a center-right with a passive approach towards sustainability and cutural diversity, and finally the ascencion to power of a far-right government whose positions espoused negationist ideas regarding the climate emergency and an effective deregulation of environmental policies. Today, as Brazilians say, things appear to have stopped getting worse. But even to regenerate and return to the point where things are a decade ago will still take time.

In any case, Tropixel was an axis of conceptualising collaborative approaches, recognising that Ubatuba needed more spaces to imagine, prototype, and build other versions of a common future. From that point, a local assemblage of people and organisations created diverse of initiatives aiming at promoting such ideas. Some of those initiatives are described below:

- Ninho was a social venture originally hosted by a community radio station, which branched off as an autonomous location. Between 2014 and 2020, ninho served as a co-working space, science-culture venue and meeting point for interested actors from the city and beyond.
- Ciência Aberta Ubatuba was a research-action project on open and collaborative science and development, which took place between 2015 and 2017. Funded by the Canadian (IDRC - International Development Research Center) and a member of their OCSD network, the initiative was led by a local team in partnership with IBICT (Brazilian Institute of Research in Science and Technology, subordinated to the Ministry of Science and Technology). The project has successfully connected a diversity of actors related to the production and diffusion of knowledge. The project has had lasting positive outcomes, both concrete and symbolic.
- inc.ubalab was a collaborative incubator designed during amid Ciência Aberta Ubatuba with the intention of keeping up with the high level of interaction of that project, as well as focusing on initiatives created by local actors, to foster the exchange of knowledge, opportunities and resources between them.
- Wiki Ubatuba is a collaborative web environment for social-environmental initiatives.
- ID21 was a collaborative study about community-based digital inclusion in Brazil, developed by Tropixel and Instituto Neos, with support from the University of Bristol. It was followed by fonte.wiki, an online repository of open educational resource on digital policy, and the development of semente, a toolkit for community action.

## 2025 around the corner

A series of projects building on the topics and contexts mentioned above is being planned for the near future. At the same time that they are new phases of ongoing cooperations, there are also elements of novelty as they seek broader connections and deeper reach. For instance, the design team responsible for the semente toolkit is establishing alliances with nonprofits, communities, activists, schools, and social enterprises. Between the end of 2024 and the first half of 2025, participatory processes will contribute decisively to better define the communities and activities of partner organisations. Semente will help them visualise their shared dreams and agree on concrete actions. In turn, the semente team will collect feedback to improve the method and its tools.

At this pont – September 2024 –, this project has agreed on alliances with two local partners. Instituto Neos is an organisation dedicated to the promotion of socio-biodiversity on the northern part of Ubatuba, working with local communities through cultural and environmental actions. The first version of semente was created in partnership with Neos and the Tropixel festival. GAIATO offers play-centred activities for children and teenagers in Ipiranguinha, the most densely populated working-class neighbourhood in the city. Both organisations have engaged previously with creative perspectives over digital media, as partners of the Tactical Technology Collective and other initiatives. There are also ongoing conversations with other organisations and stakeholders to join the processes in coming phases.

For this new phase of collaborations, semente expects to explore possibilities for community-focused and climate-aware entrepreneurship. It will promote the critical appropriation of technologies and convivial climate action. The goal is of generating insight to address climate fatigue and superficial consumerism with actions considered relevant by local youth. It will engage with diverse social groups and incorporate the awareness of territory and social characteristics brought by project partners.