## Semente - Co-Designing Community-Based Digital Policy

//Submission to participate on the launch event of Critical Infrastructure Lab, in Amsterdam. This proposal was selected. Bernardo and Felipe ran a workshop with participants.//

**Description:** This interactive workshop aims to introduce a participatory toolkit that enables the co-design of community-based digital policy. The toolkit, called Semente (Portuguese for “seed”), is being developed collaboratively since 2022. It is based on cooperation between Brazilian activists and organisations promoting the critical reflection on past experiences and current conditions in that country in the fields of digital inclusion, free/open-source culture and the critical appropriation of technologies. The University of Bristol supported the first phase of the development of Semente.
The workshop will demonstrate the use of Semente to create or enhance critical infrastructure projects, such as digital literacy strategies for nonprofits and technology alliances that cater to specific territories. Participants will reflect on how to engage in participatory policy-making at the local or regional level, emphasising the promotion of community values and interests.
The session will involve a combination of exposition, directed discussion and practical exercises using the Semente toolkit. By the end of the workshop, participants will acquire a systemic perspective on creating or enhancing digital initiatives that align with community needs and worldviews. The facilitators will also be collecting structured feedback on how to improve the toolkit for future versions. 
