# Semente Lab - research proposal

//This research proposal was submitted for a grant but ultimately not selected.//

## Description of Project 

Semente Lab is a 12-month-long exploration in the fields of digital literacy, community-based technology policy and contemporary democracy in Brazil. It builds on a series of cooperation activities conducted in recent years between the University of Bristol and partners with situated experience in the South American context.

During the year 2023, Semente Lab will expand on remarkable insights found, for instance, upon analysing interviews with recognised leaders of digital literacy projects and finding common critical elements among their assessment of the situation. Chiefly, the detrimental impacts of disappearing progressive digital policy following political turmoil in Brazil since 2015, as well as the radical changes taking place in the whole world that require society to rethink the role of information technologies in everyday social life.

Inasmuch as Brazil has a notable history of critical appropriation of digital technologies and new media in recent decades in line with its ever-dynamic and active culture, the country is arguably entering a new phase in political as well as social terms right at this moment. A renewed presence of Brazil in the international scenario as a symbol of fighting poverty and promoting economic inclusion is now explicitly added to a new centrality of environmental concerns and countering climate change. That set of complex missions requires policymakers, government organisations, nonprofits, communities, and the private sector to be aligned and aware of the potentialities and shortcomings of digital technologies for contemporary societies.

Semente Lab expands on the work started in 2022 with the Semente toolkit. That project - whose name translates to “seed” - was an effort to create concrete tools to start regenerating policy for technology and society on new grounds. Going even deeper into the seed metaphor, the goal for this new phase is not to sow tidy gardens but rather to establish the bases for quick and comprehensive reforestation of commons-oriented digital initiatives. In the period between 2003 and 2010, Brazil pioneered the conception and deployment of landmark digital policy. For instance, the many programmes of digital inclusion, like Telecentros and Casas Brasil that used free and open-source software to provide equipment and internet access to populations in disadvantaged communities. The country also had a large-scale online consultation process to create and validate its internet regulation, called the Marco Civil da Internet. Further, under then Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil, a series of government programmes - such as Pontos de Cultura and CulturaDigital.Br - proposed an anthropological understanding of digital technologies not only in terms of their economic effects but also as forms of expression and mediators of social life.

Semente Lab is based on the belief that concrete and effective transformative possibilities can be generated by articulating successful policy experiences of the past with issues made important more recently such as privacy and security, the effects of fake information on democratic participation and the benefits of using technologies to build commons-based life projects. Such a potential does not relate only to Brazilian society but can create and inspire better futures elsewhere in the world, given the importance of such topics to virtually every country at present times. 

The new government is due to start its term in January. The first semester of 2023 will witness a number of potentially innovative initiatives being launched by the incoming administration. The project is designed to seize on the possibilities of the coming months in a timely manner. In such a particular window of opportunity, Semente Lab partners with organisations active in the Brazilian scenario building and supporting commons-based civic innovation and grassroots policy-making.

The project will be led by Berlin-based researcher Felipe Schmidt Fonseca, who has decades of experience in digital critical appropriation projects in Brazil and abroad. Felipe was an advisor in past cooperation projects between the University of Bristol and Instituto Neos in Ubatuba, Brazil. He is also the leading articulator of Tropixel, an open and collaborative network with over a hundred members including activists, technologists, professors, entrepreneurs, researchers and others around the topics of culture, science, technology and society. Tropixel became a lifeline of critical thinking and making through the challenging times witnessed in recent years due to the lack of institutional support. Five editions of the Tropixel festival have been organised since 2013, making it not only a vibrant online instance but also a strong and active community.

For Semente Lab, the idea is to enable ongoing articulation that seizes opportunities to ingrain a commons-based perspective into emerging digital policy consistently. Four modules of activities are planned for the 12 months of the project: 

1. ongoing participatory construction through the Tropixel network, 
2. an event in the federal capital Brasilia, 
3. a working meeting during the 2023 edition of the Tropixel Festival in Ubatuba, and 
4. communication about Semente Lab. The four modules are described below.

Throughout the year, regular public online meetings and activities will be organised via the Tropixel network in order to present the project, collect continuous feedback about the Semente toolkit, propose ways to improve it and generate opportunities to use the toolkit in different contexts and institutions. Inspired by participatory action research methods, this module focuses on making room for lateral conversations and testing ideas with a diversity of potential stakeholders. The skills and experience of Tropixel members will be leveraged in order to fine-tune the Semente toolkit and continuously identify potential partnerships both in Brazil as well as in Europe.

The critical vehicle of Semente Lab’s incidence in real-world policy will be a presential event in the federal capital Brasília in the first semester. The initially planned date is April 2023. This open-source inspired digital policy laboratory aims at the right spot in time between the first days of government - when new officers will be getting the hang of their roles, staff and possibilities - and the moment, likely in the early second semester, when they will start implementing new projects. Depending on variables beyond Semente Lab, this module can be a launching event for such a representation.

During the event in Brasília, policymakers and community leaders will be invited to join participatory exercises based on an updated version of the Semente toolkit to build commons-based digital policy. The main idea is opening space where people in diverse institutional contexts can exchange ideas, align expectations and create opportunities for partnerships and future cooperation—all keeping in mind the centrality of democratic participation, of the critical appropriation of technologies and eco-social principles.

At a later moment, likely between July and August, a working group composed of members of partner organisations will gather once again for a working meeting during the Tropixel festival in Ubatuba. The group will assess the updated version of the Semente toolkit and its use following the presential event in Brasília. It will also establish the bases for the last module, by planning and designing a communications strategy for Semente Lab.

The final module will take place between September and December 2023. Centred in spreading the discoveries and findings of the other three modules and making the Semente toolkit available to a wider audience, it may be composed of various publications - in social media, live video streaming, guides, reports and academic journals. The main platform for that will be the fonte.wiki website created in a previous phase of cooperation between Instituto Neos and the University of Bristol. At this stage, Semente Lab will also be seeking more opportunities of partnerships and conducting online planning sessions for further development in the future.


## Expected benefits and policy impact
 
Brazil is going through a unique moment in many senses. After a period of political dissolution - particularly concerning social inclusion, climate change, science and education - there is a window to propose regenerative and forward-looking possibilities. In previous cooperation projects, we have identified, in particular, the detrimental impact that the removal of established community-oriented digital policies has had over recent years. In response, we started designing and prototyping tools - the ID21 report, the fonte.wiki website, the Semente toolkit - to overcome that situation in the hopes that the scenario would at some point allow positive change to happen. We are precisely at that moment nowadays. As the new government starts its mandate on January 1st, various ongoing articulations will gain institutional weight. We understand that it will be a moment of significant transformation and that the projects recently developed between Bristol and partners in Brazil can be instrumental in that matter. Through situated alliances with organisations, policy-makers and authorities, the Semente toolkit will be turned into a concrete instrument to improve the quality and efficiency of future digital policy. The project will also be a platform to build and deepen national and international exchange focused on promoting the creation of participatory and fair digital policy in Brazil whilst researching what experiences there can be helpful in other contexts as well.

## Partners and policy stakeholders

As mentioned, Semente Lab will constantly interact with the Tropixel network in order to articulate exchanges with people and organisations in the fields of digital rights and social innovation. New partnerships will undoubtedly arise from this module, including with organisations from various cities who participated in previous stages of Semente, fonte.wiki and ID21:

- Casa de Cultura Tainã, Campinas
- Projeto Saúde e Alegria, Santarém
- Silo, Resende
- Coletivo Digital, São Paulo
- Ponto de Cultura Coco de Umbigada, Olinda
- Thydewá, Olivença
- Quilombo do Campinho, Paraty

The project will look into partnerships with leading organisations in the field of digital policy in Brazil. Examples are Artigo 19 - the Brazilian branch of Article 19, CGI.br - the Brazilian internet regulator, Datalabe - working with citizen-generated data in a favela in Rio de Janeiro, Pretalab - addressing issues of gender, race and inequality through technology, Escola de Ativismo - the school of activism. Cooperation with academic institutions is also expected - for instance, UFBA in Salvador, UNICAMP in Campinas, UFABC in Santo André, UNB in Brasília and others.

Additionally, potential international partners are organisations interested in developing cooperation with the Brazilian context. Some examples with whom the project leaders have already worked in the past are Tactical Technology Collective, Global Innovation Gathering, SantaLab, Medialab Prado, Mozilla Foundation, GOSH and others.
