## Abstract

//Submission to participate on a research workshop in Berlin. The proposal was not selected.//

In the period between 2003 and 2010, Brazil pioneered the conception and deployment of landmark digital policy. For instance, many programmes of digital inclusion - like Telecentros and Casas Brasil - used free and open-source software to provide equipment and internet access to populations in disadvantaged communities. The country also had a large-scale online consultation process to create and validate its internet regulatory framework, called the Marco Civil da Internet. Additionally, under then Minister of Culture Gilberto Gil, a series of government programmes - such as Pontos de Cultura and CulturaDigital.Br - proposed the anthropological understanding of digital technologies not only in terms of their economic effects but also as forms of expression and mediators of social life. That scenario promised to change for the better the understanding of the role that digital technologies can play in contemporary society - by creating new forms of relationship between traditional, urban and popular culture and opening new spaces of political representation and participation.

Throughout the last decade, however, much has changed. Internationally, digital social technologies have been weaponised to promote neoliberalism, xenophobia and extremism. Domestically, Brazil has had a political coup followed by two years of conservative rule and four years under a far-right government. The ill consequences of that phase into its once vibrant digital culture - and society at large - are yet to be fully understood.

Recently, a broad political coalition put former leader Lula da Silva back in the presidential seat. A renewed presence of Brazil in the international scenario as a symbol of fighting poverty and promoting economic inclusion is now explicitly added to a new centrality of environmental concerns and countering climate change. That set of complex missions requires policymakers and civil society to be aligned and aware of the potentialities and shortcomings of digital technologies in current times.

Semente (Portuguese for “seed”) is an ongoing research-action effort based on the belief that concrete and effective transformative possibilities can be generated by articulating successful policy experiences of the past with issues made important more recently such as privacy and security, the effects of fake information on democratic participation and the benefits of using technologies to build commons-based life projects. Going even deeper into the seed metaphor, the goal for this new phase is not to sow tidy gardens but rather to establish the bases for quick and comprehensive reforestation of commons-oriented digital initiatives. 

Semente will expand on remarkable insights found, for instance, upon analysing interviews with recognised leaders of digital literacy projects and finding common critical elements among their assessment of the situation. Chiefly, the detrimental impacts of disappearing progressive digital policy following political turmoil in Brazil since 2015, as well as the radical changes taking place in the whole world that require society to rethink the role of information technologies in everyday social life.
